Property rules documentation (#1076)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/authentication-authorization/limitations.adoc

[[access-control-limitations-db-operations]]
== Security and performance

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rules of a security model may impact the performance of some database operations.
```

Reviewer: How about something like this:

> This is because extra security checks are necessary and these checks will require additional data accesses, especially in the case of count store operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because extra security checks are necessary, and they require additional data access.

> These count store operations are, however, usually very fast lookups and the difference might therefore be noticeable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, count store operations, which are usually fast lookups, may experience notable differences in performance.
```

[[access-control-limitations-db-operations]]
== Security and count store operations

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Author: The problem is that is it not only for count store operations, even if it is a good example because it is very clear that it will be slower in that case and it is easy to explain why.

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Reviewer: Then, we need to change the heading and write in general and mention the count store operations just as an example.

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Reviewer: And perhaps also mention the other impacted operations.

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Author: The second example, under the sub-header `Property-based access control limitations` is an other example which has nothing to do with count store but more a general example why it will impact performance.

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Author: > Then, we need to change the heading and write in general and mention the count store operations just as an example.

What do you think about header: "Security rules impact on performance" ? 
or something similar

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Author: I did not change this since it applies to more than just count store operations.

> The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.

Reviewer: How about something like this:

> This is because extra security checks are necessary to incur additional data accesses, especially in the case of count store operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is because extra security checks are necessary that incur additional data accesses, especially in the case of count store operations.
```
maybe makes it clearer?

Author: hmm, not sure. I think I like the `to` more.

Reviewer 2: I don't feel very strongly about it 🤷

> This is because extra security checks are necessary to incur additional data accesses, especially in the case of count store operations.

Author: What do you think about this instead? 
```
This is because extra security checks are necessary and these checks will require additional data accesses, especially in the case of count store operations.

> This is because extra security checks are necessary to incur additional data accesses, especially in the case of count store operations.

Reviewer: I think this is a bit wordy and adds unnecessary complexity. Did you see the two sentences above? I tried to simplify the paragraph.

> These are, however, usually very fast lookups and the difference might not be noticeable.

Reviewer 2: I think this section actually was supposed to point out that count operations that without privileges might be fast can get slow due to extra checks needed (and not being able to use count store for example)?

Reviewer 2: For example look at the table just above your new property rule section

Author: hmmm, I just think this sentence is strange. I added the "not" because I thought we tried to express that even if it got slower it might not be noticeable since it is fast. But if it the other way around I can remove it, or maybe we can express it more clearly somehow.

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure it will get noticeable slower since we no longer can use the fast version and that that is what it was supposed to point out.

You also removed the part about extra additional data accesses which I think is still accurate/relevant?

> These are, however, usually very fast lookups and the difference might therefore be noticeable.

Reviewer 2: I'd guess the affected database operations:
> may impact some database operations

But it could be made clearer

> The rules of a security model may impact some of the database operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The rules of a security model may impact some database operations.
```

> This means extra security checks are necessary to incur additional data accesses, especially in the case of count store operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is because extra security checks are necessary, especially in the case of count store operations.
```

Due to the additional data accesses that the security checks need to do, this operation will be slower compared to executing the query as an unrestricted user.

> |===
> [[property-based-access-control-limitations]]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|===

[[property-based-access-control-limitations]]
```

Due to the additional data accesses that the security checks need to do, this operation will be slower compared to executing the query as an unrestricted user.

|===
[[property-based-access-control-limitations]]
=== Property-based access control limitations

> The same goes for when adding security rules based on property values. Similar to above we have a `restricted` and a `free` roles as an example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Extra node-level security checks are necessary when adding security rules based on property rules, and these can have a significant performance impact. In the examples below we use the roles `restricted` and a `free`:
```

I prefer not referencing the above section because the reader my want to look at this section in isolation

[source, cypher]
----
GRANT TRAVERSE ON GRAPH * FOR (n:Customer) WHERE n.secret <> true TO restricted;
GRANT TRAVERSE ON GRAPH * ELEMENTS * TO free;
----

When executing query:

[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (n:Customer)
> RETURN count(n)
> ----
> 
> For both roles the execution plan will look like this:
> 
> ----
> +--------------------------+
> | Operator                 |
> +--------------------------+
> | +ProduceResults          |
> | |                        +
> | +NodeCountFromCountStore |
> +--------------------------+
> ----
> 
> Internally, however, very different operations need to be executed.
> The following table illustrates the difference:
> 
> [%header,cols=2*]
> |===
> |User with `free` role
> |User with `restricted` role
> 
> |The database can access the count store and retrieve the total number of nodes with the label `:Customer`.
> 
> This is a very quick operation.
> 
> |The database cannot access the count store because it must make sure that only traversable nodes with the desired label `:Customer` are counted.
> Due to this, each node with the `:Customer` label needs to be accessed and examined to make sure that they do not have property `secret` set to `true`.
> 
> Due to the additional data accesses that the security checks need to do, this operation will be slower compared to executing the query as an unrestricted user.
> 
> |===

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MATCH (n:Customer)
RETURN n
----

For both roles the execution plan will look like this:

----
+--------------------------+
| Operator                 |
+--------------------------+
| +ProduceResults          |
| |                        +
| +AllNodesScan             |
+--------------------------+
----

Internally, however, very different operations need to be executed.
The following table illustrates the difference:

[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|User with `free` role
|User with `restricted` role

|The database can scan all nodes and quickly determine whether nodes are accessible based solely on the nodes' labels (specifically the presence of the `:Customer` label). 

This is a relatively quick operation.

|The database must also access the properties of each of the nodes and inspect their values to make sure the property rule criteria are met (i.e. that `secret` is not set to `true` in this case). 

So due to the additional data access required by the security checks, this operation will be slower compared to executing the query as an unrestricted user.

|===
```

I think using a `MATCH (n) RETURN n` example is more relevant than comparing to accessing the count store.
